this machine and see if it's working.
One, two, three, four.
Five, six, seven, eight.
This is Tuesday, December 5th, I believe.
in the Engineering Physics Building interviewing Tom Adair, Chairman of Physics and longtime friend.
To begin with, Tom, would you describe for this machine and anybody who may listen or read later your background and experience before you came to A&M?
Where did you grow up?
Where did you go to school?
What did mom and dad do?
Where did you get your PhD and so forth?
I grew up in Houston, went to Stephen F. Austin High School.
I lived out near Hobby Airport because my father was a pilot for an oil company.
I finished high school and everybody was coming to A&M and that was my decision.
So I came up here in 1953.
My father always wanted me to study dentistry.
That's what I was going to be, a dentist.
And then sometime in high school, I decided I wanted to be a medical doctor.
And before I graduated from high school, I decided I wanted to be an engineer.
So I arrived at Texas A&M in 1953 as a young engineering student.
I always tell my
this story halfway through the semester, and that is that I had to take engineering drawing.
Well, I lived on the campus theater side of campus, north side, and if you know where the flower garden is, across the street from the television station,
That's where a building was that we had engineering drawing.
So Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, I had to get up and be across campus and in that class by 8 o'clock.
I did not like engineering drawing for other reasons, too.
So I found that if I'd switched to physics, I didn't have to take the second semester.
So by the second semester, I was majoring in physics.
I graduated in 57.
I went to Rice and was there two years.
Finished my master's summers while I was at Rice.
I worked for Humboldt Oil and Refining Company at Production Research there in Houston.
And then when I finished my master's, I went to work for them permanently.
And got my master's degree, I might add, with Charles Squire.
at Rice, and then after three years, when did I finish?
In 59, yeah, three years in industry then, I also finished my military commitment while I was at Hummel, and then in 62, I decided to go back to school, and so I came, A&M offered me a fellowship, so I came to A&M for my PhD,
And Charles Squire arrived at A&M in 1962, and so I arrived here in 62, and he was here.
I got my PhD with him in 65.
Were the, now, the arrival of you two, was that coincidental?
Coincidental, yeah.
But once I knew he was here, then I knew that I'd work with him for a PhD.
And your specialty?
In low temperature physics.
And you finished when?
I finished in 65, and then I took a postdoc year in the Netherlands.
I worked for a year at Cameron Lone, his laboratory in Leiden, the Netherlands, and then came back to Texas A&M to look for a job.
By then, Squire was head of the department, and he asked me to come back and spend a year.
And while I was here, then I could, it's hard to look for a job over there, and I'd come back here and work a year with him as a young faculty member and then go off somewhere.
That year was a very stormy year.
What year was that?
That would have been 1966, 67.
Now what I'm having trouble remembering is if he were also the head 67, 68, I believe he was.
So during that time, the physics faculty went to General Rudder and said, you got to get rid of this guy.
And so surprisingly, I think, Rudder decided to get rid of him.
So he was removed from his position as associate dean and as department head and made a distinguished professor.
So his plan, at least as far as I could tell, his plan was to be a distinguished professor and do research and forget about administration.
He did that for one year, and during that year he hired two other young faculty members.
So there were three young fac—oh, I'm sorry, he hired—
Yeah, he did.
Jim Plough came in as a young assistant professor.
I was a young assistant professor.
And then the next year he made an offer to Don Noggle.
Who?
Don Noggle.
Noggle was a- In a UGLE.
Yes.
And he was an undergraduate at Rice working some with Squire while I was a graduate student there.
And then he went off to the Marine Corps for four years and then in 62 he was back to continue his education, decided to go to Texas A&M, not real sure why.
And he, so he and I showed up here together in 62 and both worked for Squire and then both finished in 65 and both went to Europe for postdoc year.
And then Naugle came back to the States at Maryland as a postdoc and then Squire brought him down here
to begin it in 69.
Well, before Noggle arrived, then Squire resigned and decided that he wanted out, so he resigned, and that left the two of us
with nine graduate students, I think.
And so we were very busy for, and I had most of them.
Don had a couple of them, and I had the rest of them.
And between the two of us, we finished up those graduate students over the next few years.
And by then, I was stuck.
So your first year as a faculty member was 60?
66.
66, 67.
Do you remember what the beginning salary was?
You asked me that the other day.
I should have looked it up, but no, but I do happen to know that
One of my friends was hired in 1969 at $1170 a month.
So I want to say, I want to say $740 a month.
I think $740 a month was my starting point.
And it was a nine month or 12 month?
Nine month appointment.
Describe in those first two or three years, describe what your teaching responsibilities were.
What courses, how many students and so forth.
The teaching loads for physics have always been low.
In fact, I have used your story about the old head of history who went off to President Sherman Hall?
Ralph?
Ralph Steen.
Steen.
Stephen F. Austin.
I think his story was
Someone went before the board, and I think this is your story, and they wanted to know, well, how many hours does he work?
Well, he works, he works, I want you to know that he works 12 hours.
Well, that's a good day's work in anybody's book.
Was that your story?
But the teaching load when I arrived on the faculty was one lecture and the recitations that go with it.
And so I was in the classroom three hours a week for lecture and three to four hours a week for recitation.
And what were the, what courses?
I taught Physics 219, which is a second semester physics course for engineers.
So these were, these were engineering students taking electromagnetism.
Describe what it was like for you to prepare for those lectures first, the first semesters.
Oh, you, you're asking me to really .
I've, I don't remember a whole lot about it, but
certainly it took a good bit of time to prepare the notes for the first time you're teaching and I did have an unusual situation and then when I finished my postdoc in the Netherlands I thought that I was coming back for postdoc year continuing postdoc year with Squire but when I arrived I was a he had brought me back as an assistant professor and so I was supposed to teach well he had been teaching my course because I didn't get back until
first of October.
So he was teaching my course.
So I had to go in.
The first lecture, I went in, and he lectured, and I sat in the back of the room.
And then the next two lectures, I lectured, and he sat in the back of the room.
And it was much nicer when he left.
And I had the class myself.
Normally in those years, how many students per section?
Oh, I probably had 35, 35 or 40.
And all engineers, all pre-engineers,
All in the sophomore year of engineering, yes.
I probably had more than 35 or 40, because they were broken into smaller groups.
So I probably had 70 or 80.
And this was in the physics building?
Physics building.
There were two rooms downstairs, you may remember, in the basement.
Two very nice lecture rooms.
All right, and then the, you said the recitation, what was that?
That was the same students in smaller groups for problem-solving sessions, send them to the board and help them over hard spots in the problems, that sort of thing.
What about lab?
The labs were the responsibility of teaching assistants, though it's certainly under my supervision.
I had taught the laboratories as a teaching assistant as a graduate student.
When you began here, what were your, did you have some long-term dreams, aspirations, goals, self-appointed goals?
When I arrived on the faculty in 1966, I certainly intended to go back into industry.
I had not really given much thought to being a university professor.
I had come out of industry and enjoyed my research in industry with the Humboldt Oil and Refining Company and had intended to go back and
I don't, I think, I went down and visited.
I don't remember if I went down and interviewed or not, but I went down and visited.
But when I got tied up into the academic end here, working with Squire and young assistant professor in teaching, I liked it.
And then when Squire left, I had too much responsibility for getting these students finished.
to leave and then after they were all finished up, that's three or four years down the road and I was settled in and comfortable and enjoying life.
Now, in those days we didn't have a tenure system.
No.
So that there wasn't any talk about being on the tenure track.
Do you remember at the end of your first year or second year any kind of quality evaluation or did anybody, were you aware that somebody gave you some kind of measurement?
No, no.
I don't remember any evaluation.
Salary increases, were they merit, as far as you knew, merit-based?
As far as I knew.
I never paid much attention.
Describe the department in those first years.
Who were the key people?
Well, in 19, well, one of the reasons that Squire was brought back was to,
write a proposal for the cyclotron.
The Welch Foundation was interested in the cyclotron at Texas A&M, and A&M had a proposal that, done a white paper or something, but Squire wrote the proposal for the cyclotron that we now have.
Well, the last generation cyclotron.
And so,
He was heavily involved in that.
My participation in that I remember clearly, and that was that I was one of the two graduate students who carried the model of the cyclotron into the board meeting that Scar gave the presentation, but that was before I came back as faculty member.
The in-board meeting?
Yes.
What was their reaction to the proposal?
The only thing I know, I was not allowed to stay.
I just carried the model in and left.
But the thing Squire came out saying was, can you believe one of those people asked me why we needed a cyclotron when we already had a reactor?
Now, this is in the early 60s.
Yes.
And Mr. Rutter is here.
As far as you were aware,
all the key people on the campus were very much for the Cyclotron.
Yes, as far as I know.
Of course, I was a young faculty member.
I didn't, I wasn't involved in any of the, in very much.
And I wasn't involved in many of the rumors.
The proposal, by the time I came back on the faculty, the proposal had been funded.
The Welch Foundation had put in a million dollars for the building, and we were moving towards building up a group, and we brought in some people.
Some didn't stay very long.
We brought in a fellow named Igo.
A matter of months and then left.
It must have been something political going on that I don't know anything about.
Then we had my early years on the faculty were years that we were building up the faculty in nuclear physics.
That's when we brought in a number of young faculty members working in atomic or in
nuclear physics at the cyclotron.
The cyclotron must have gone online in the late 60s, forgotten really, sometime in there.
The director of the cyclotron in those days was the old vice president, Andy Sutton.
And there was a lot of feuding going on
in those days between the engineers and the scientists.
Finally, they fired or they removed the director, the associate director of the cyclotron and put in the engineer, MacFarlane.
There's a great story about MacFarlane.
Did you know MacFarlane?
Yes.
Big, tall, good-looking guy, smoked a big cigar.
Well, he and the chief engineer over there went up to accept the magnet for the cyclotron.
some small company up east, I think.
And they spent two days inspecting the magnets and there were some, a number of flaws.
And so MacFarlane told the president of the company that he had to have a meeting because there were some problems.
So he, the president of the company got all of the
vice presidents and chief engineers, and they're all sitting around a big conference table, and McFarlane and our engineer, name I've forgotten, McFarlane stands up.
He's smoking his cigar.
He puts the cigar down.
He said, gentlemen, I want you to know that this magnet is flawed.
You're going to have to fix this.
You're going to fix this.
You're going to fix this before Texas A&M is going to consider accepting this magnet.
He reached down, picked up the cigar, and put the wrong end in his mouth.
So all of his cool was lost in one instant.
Other key, who were the key veteran faculty members in physics?
In physics, there were very few because there weren't many faculty members until the early 60s.
But about how many were there?
Oh, I don't know.
I would guess 15, 20.
I could be wrong.
But the old-timers, the major ones, Jim Potter, who was department head all through my student days, and then he was removed at the time that the college was formed.
Squire was brought in as associate dean under
Frank Hubert, because he was Dean of Arts and Sciences.
And about that time they split the college into several pieces.
The College of Science was formed, brought in Zaner as dean, and Squire was associate dean to Zaner.
And the year I was gone then, Zaner then removed
put Potter as department head and put Squire in as department head.
And that's the way it was when I came back.
And by that time, some of the key faculty members, Melvin Eisner and Jack McIntyre, Jack came in 1963,
And then Nelson Dollar came in 1962.
Who were the teachers of the plain vanilla introductory courses?
The, well, all of us really.
Is that right?
Yes.
The masses of students took?
Yes, yes, yes.
But we had a number of the old timers still here, Ben Bariski.
U-R-I-S-K-I-E?
Yes, I think so, yes.
But local fellow, he's grown up, he was a teenager on this campus, because in those days the faculty lived on campus, or faculty and staff, I don't know if his father was faculty, but they lived right there by the system building on campus, and actually they formed, his family formed
the area where I live now, east of campus, the Rose Circle area, it was a farm.
And his property that his family formed went to the fence just beyond my house now.
And Ben died probably two years ago.
But the faculty teaching
the mass of students, Jack Hebert and Bob Kenefick, Nelson Duller, Don Noggle, Jack McIntyre, all of us.
Were there in your student days any legendary physics teachers?
Jim Potter was the main one, Jim Potter.
Did he have a nickname?
I don't think so, but there were a number of stories about him that wouldn't go right there with Screaming Al Nelson and some of the others.
Two quick stories.
One was he was riding his bicycle to work, and one of the sergeants in military science banged him a little bit.
This car knocked him over, and so the sergeant got out of the truck and ran over.
Are you all right, sir?
Yes, yes, yes.
Did you tell me which way I was going?
He said, yes, you were going that way.
Well, good.
I've already had lunch.
Now, probably not a true story, but this was the same.
This was something easily believable about Jim Potter.
The other was that he went to a physics meeting in Philadelphia one year and drove up there with the family and then flew home.
I don't believe that one either, but he was the type of person that you could tell these stories about and people would believe.
Was there allegedly in those early years a tough, tough, tough physics course that people had to take and was there a supposedly easy course?
There, over the years, all of the physics courses have been, had reputations for being very difficult.
But we did have a course, Physics for Poets type course.
There was a Physics 350 that we taught for many, many years.
It was a very popular course and taught by Nelson Duller for most of the time.
And that course died out 15, 20 years ago and it started struggling when David Maxwell was dean of liberal arts and that he proclaimed, along with his faculty I guess, that their students couldn't take any course that was designed just for their students.
Oh.
And his argument was that they ought to be taking the courses that are designed for the engineers or the courses designed for the agricultural science people.
Well, of course, none of his students were going to take those courses.
They didn't have the mathematical sophistication to take those courses.
So when he proclaimed that, then they couldn't take Physics 350.
And so we didn't have enough students taking 350.
And so over the years, the course died.
Interestingly enough, I've now had inquiries from the College of Liberal Arts about whether we would revive that course and also from College of Education.
It was an excellent course.
I went to David and I said, well, if you don't think they're learning enough, why don't you come take the final exam?
And he declined.
Back in your early days, using the perspective now of 30, 35 years, describe the typical
student taking your introductory physics courses then?
How well prepared?
Oh, they were very well prepared.
They came in with good backgrounds and most of them did well.
Where were they from geographically?
full spectrum in small towns and all the way up to Houston, Dallas, and mostly from Texas, of course.
And these were engineering majors, and this was their second year, they were sophomores?
The course that I was teaching in those days was they were sophomores taking their second physics course.
And were they still using slide rules?
Yes, yes, certainly.
I don't know quite when we quit using slide rules.
Mine's right there.
I have threatened to take it to class on occasion when the battery runs dead on some calculator is handing it to them and telling them they can use that.
And share some anecdotes that you remember about some students in those days.
Did they ever try any pranks on you in those early days?
And if so, what were they?
Oh, the things I remember, their excuses for not doing their homework or not... Well, the most interesting one I ever had was in the Vietnam era.
You might recall we lost a B-52 over there.
We didn't use B-52s early in that war, and then we started using B-52s.
And the AB-52 was shot down, and there was a general officer on board.
And I had a student who I'd already had some problems with early in the semester, and this was late in the semester.
And this student missed my third exam.
And so when he came back to talk to me about it, he said that he was sorry, but his father was on a B-52 that was shut down in Vietnam.
and that his grandmother and mother had flown in from California and one of the military science instructors had flown them to Dallas and they waited up there to hear about his father.
and so that he couldn't take my exam.
And I just said, fine, fine, sure, that's fine, that's the only thing you could do.
But as soon as he left, I walked over to Military Science where I had a number of friends, Tom Parsons being one of them, and there certainly was no truth to the story.
Did you confront him with that?
He never came back.
He never came back, so he just disappeared after that and I didn't pay much attention because he was failing the course and failed it anyhow.
The only thing that would have gotten him was a chance to take the exam over again or something, but I found it humorous.
Did they ever try anything during class?
No, I run a pretty tight ship during class and still do.
Were they aware that you had been an undergraduate here?
They usually become aware of that sometime during the semester.
I used to wear my ring, but my knuckle has gotten such my ring won't fit.
Now my ring is lost.
It's somewhere around the house, I'm certain, but I can't find it.
So yes, they become aware, and that's had different effects on different people.
Let's see, no goofy phone calls from students?
No, no.
No homework identical to somebody else's or anything like that?
Oh, yeah.
I've had a few of those a long, long time, but I don't pay much attention to homework.
My philosophy on homework is you take it up and you grade it because that puts pressure on them to work it, but I'm going to find out whether they've worked it or copied it off somebody on the exams.
As you were a junior faculty member, to whom did you turn for advice and counsel?
The senior, senior faculty.
Which ones?
Who were your favorite?
Oh, we had, of course, Ben Bariski, of course, was one.
And we had a fellow here in those days named Palmer, but I'm not going to be able to tell his last name.
Barker, Palmer Barker.
And they were a couple of the old, old timers.
They'd been here when I was a student, and they were here while I was a young faculty member.
Joe Hamm was another.
He was a, he came while I was a student and then was here and just retired a few years ago.
Do you remember any advice they gave you?
No, not really.
Now, I remember some advice that I got when I was an undergraduate from one of the counselors on campus.
who became a counselor, and it's going to take me a minute to think of his name, he became a counselor out in the high school, and that's Buddy... Denton.
Denton, yeah, Buddy.
Buddy was a freshman advisor when I was a freshman here in 1953.
Now, my parents came up to a football game one time,
and found me in the hospital.
And I had some, I don't know what I had, but I had something that put me in the hospital.
So they took me home and I missed 10 days of school.
And midterm grades came out.
I made three F's and D and B or something like that.
And so Buddy advised me to drop out of school and come back in January.
But I said I didn't think so.
And so I stayed, and of course by the end of the semester I had turned the grades around.
I certainly didn't make straight A's, but I got my grades up.
Were you married when you joined the faculty?
Yes.
I got married in 62 when I came back as a graduate student.
Describe what it was like for a young couple to move to College Station.
That was interesting.
It came in 62, just newly married, and in those days Texas A&M did not have a personnel to do it.
And if somebody wanted a job, they had to go from department to department to department.
And so Carolyn was out going from department to department, ran into Clark Monroe,
And he had just been hired as director of personnel in 1962.
And so he... That's M-U-N-R-O-E.
Okay.
And so Clark hired Carolyn.
They were the first two people who work in the personnel office here.
Shortly after that, he discovered the mistake he had made and that she was not a secretary.
So they hired a secretary.
And then there were three of them.
And so my...